URL:https://www.vox.com/21523212/crossword-puzzles-free-daily-printable
Title:Free online crossword puzzles from Vox - VoxGive
Newsletters
Site search
Vox main menu
Filed under:
Take a mental break with the newest Vox crossword
For the curious in all of us. Can you solve it?
If you buy something from a Vox link, Vox Media may earn a commission. See our ethics statement.
Share this story
Welcome to the Vox crossword. Puzzles come out Monday through Saturday. Make sure to bookmark this page (or add to your phone’s home screen) to find new ones each day. You can also get a weekly email reminder by signing up for our crossword newsletter. 
Puzzles are constructed by these great people and edited by Elizabeth Crane. If you want to get in touch, email us at crosswords@vox.com.
And if you solve our crosswords often, consider chipping in to help keep them free for everybody.
Looking for even more crosswords? Our first-ever crosswords books are now available for purchase wherever you buy books. The first, the Vox Mega Book of Mini Crosswords, features 150 of our bite-sized weekday puzzles. The second, the Vox Pop Culture Crosswords book, highlights pop culture references in our big Saturday puzzles ranging from Mario Kart to iCarly.
More crossword puzzles

Will you support Vox’s explanatory journalism?

      Most news outlets make their money through advertising or subscriptions. But when it comes to what we’re trying to do at Vox, there are a couple of big issues with relying on ads and subscriptions to keep the lights on:


First, advertising dollars go up and down with the economy. We often only know a few months out what our advertising revenue will be, which makes it hard to plan ahead.


Second, we’re not in the subscriptions business. Vox is here to help everyone understand the complex issues shaping the world — not just the people who can afford to pay for a subscription. We believe that’s an important part of building a more equal society. And we can’t do that if we have a paywall. 
 

So even though advertising is still our biggest source of revenue, we also seek grants and reader support. (And no matter how our work is funded, we have strict guidelines on editorial independence.)


If you also believe that everyone deserves access to trusted high-quality information, will you make a gift to Vox today? Any amount helps. 
    

                  $5/month
                

                  $10/month
                

                  $25/month
                

                  $50/month
                

              
                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              
              
                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              
            

    Next Up In
    
        The Latest
    
  

      
        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Sentences
    
The day's most important news stories, explained in your inbox.
Check your inbox for a welcome email.
Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.

      
      The Latest
    
Israel moves into southern Gaza after a week-long truce — and its goals are murkier than ever
Israeli settler violence against Palestinians in the West Bank, briefly explained 
The first results from the world’s biggest basic income experiment
George Santos’s messy expulsion vote, briefly explained
Netflix’s Squid Game reality show is kinda great. Oh no. 
How Israel fractured the left and united the right 
