URL:https://www.vox.com/
Title:Vox - Our world, explainedGive
Newsletters
Site search
Vox main menu
Top Stories
Filed under: 
Israel moves into southern Gaza after a week-long truce — and its goals are murkier than ever
Seven weeks into the war, 15,000 Palestinians have been killed and there’s no end in sight
What Henry Kissinger wrought 
One of America’s most important statesmen gave the world a series of diplomatic breakthroughs, and hundreds of thousands of bodies.
The Supreme Court seeks a middle path between following the law and blowing up the government
SEC v. Jarkesy is still likely to end in a 6-3 decision against the federal government. But it probably won’t be a catastrophic loss.
How Israel fractured the left and united the right 
What’s behind the politics shift in the United States around Israel and Palestine — and how it might affect the 2024 presidential race.
Netflix’s Squid Game reality show is kinda great. Oh no. 
Oops, they did it again (weaponized the desperation of the proletariat for fun).
There’s less meat at this year’s climate talks. But there’s plenty of bull.
Meat and dairy are driving the climate crisis. Why won’t world leaders at COP28 do anything about it?
Israeli settler violence against Palestinians in the West Bank, briefly explained 
With the world focused on Gaza, Israeli settlers and soldiers are increasing attacks on Palestinians in the West Bank.
The first results from the world’s biggest basic income experiment
Money always helps, but for the very poor, one lump sum can last a long time.
Understand the news with
Today, Explained

          Listen now in app or on public radio
        
The Golden Bachelor was actually good
The Latest
This stream has: 
The Israel-Hamas war is shifting quickly. Find the latest coverage from Vox here.
Vox podcasts tackle the Israel-Hamas war         
It’s okay to suck when you try something new
George Santos’s messy expulsion vote, briefly explained
Can the party of Trump really become a multiracial coalition?
Scaling slaughter-free meat is hard. Here’s one way to make it easier.
Take a mental break with the newest Vox crossword
Why psychedelics produce some of the most meaningful experiences in people’s lives
Why Gavin Newsom and Ron DeSantis are debating each other
We're building great things, and we need your talent.

The truth about Napoleon and Josephine’s marriage, divorce, and lasting legacy
There are now more land mines in Ukraine than almost anywhere else on the planet
Get Vox in your inbox. Sign up for Vox’s free newsletters.
What to know about the new FAFSA
Vox, explain it to me
Nikki Haley’s “rise” and the Republican flight from reality
What Matt Rife’s baffling Netflix special tells us about comedy 
US life expectancy no longer catastrophic, now merely bad
Why cheating is allowed on game shows
Alex Murdaugh stands guilty of killing his wife and son. That’s just scratching the surface. 
Why is dating advice on TikTok so sexist — and so bleak?  

      
        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Sentences
    
The day's most important news stories, explained in your inbox.
Check your inbox for a welcome email.
Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.
Podcast
The Weeds

          Subscribe Now
        
The Devil wears fast fashion

        
        Even Better
      
The big bet on “tiny homes” to fix homelessness
What is life like in Palestine? These short films offer a glimpse.
Local police should not be your go-to source for iPhone safety news
Filed under: 
The 2023 Future Perfect 50
The thinkers, activists, and scholars working on solutions to today’s (and tomorrow’s) biggest problems.
Filed under: 
How we selected the Future Perfect 50 list
Elon Musk’s attempt to silence his critics will be heard by one of America’s worst judges
The militarized AI risk that’s bigger than “killer robots”
Why Diet Coke got so expensive 
Did the Scream franchise just fall apart?
The rise of Xi Jinping, explained
The new Trump judge revolt against the Voting Rights Act, explained
I give 10 percent of my income to charity. You should, too.
The Israel-Hamas prisoner deal was extended. What comes next?
What we know about the shooting of 3 Palestinian American college students
Want to fight climate change effectively? Here’s where to donate your money.
You can’t even pay people to have more kids 
The Supreme Court case seeking to shut down wealth taxes before they even exist
Is Biden doomed in 2024? 3 theories about the president’s bad polls.
The future of the planet hinges on understanding these 5 key phrases

      
        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      VoxCare
    
Dylan Scott guides you through the fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic and the health care policies that matter most.
Check your inbox for a welcome email.
Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.
Pagination
