URL:https://www.vox.com/world-politics
Title:World Politics - VoxGive
Newsletters
Site search
Vox main menu
World Politics
Filed under: 
Israel moves into southern Gaza after a week-long truce — and its goals are murkier than ever
Filed under: 
Israeli settler violence against Palestinians in the West Bank, briefly explained 
Filed under: 
How Israel fractured the left and united the right 
Vox podcasts tackle the Israel-Hamas war         
What Henry Kissinger wrought 
There are now more land mines in Ukraine than almost anywhere else on the planet
What is life like in Palestine? These short films offer a glimpse.
The rise of Xi Jinping, explained
The Israel-Hamas prisoner deal was extended. What comes next?
What we know about the shooting of 3 Palestinian American college students
You can’t even pay people to have more kids 
How Myanmar’s resistance could topple its military government — for good
Want to donate to charity? Here are 10 guidelines for giving effectively.
The controversial phrase “from the river to sea,” explained
How Qatar became a key broker in the Israel-Hamas deal
Why Israel imprisons so many Palestinians
The Israel-Hamas hostage deal, explained
The Israel-Hamas deal is not a real ceasefire
Filed under: 
The many, many times Israelis and Palestinians tried to make peace — and failed
A harrowing film exposes the brutality of Russia’s war in Ukraine
How young Argentines helped put a far-right libertarian into power
Rishi Sunak’s cabinet shuffle won’t fix the UK’s Tories’ problems 
Most of Israel’s weapons imports come from the US. Now Biden is rushing even more arms.

      
        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Sentences
    
The day's most important news stories, explained in your inbox.
Check your inbox for a welcome email.
Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.
The controversy over TikTok and Osama bin Laden’s “Letter to America,” explained
The dire medical crisis in Gaza, explained
The achievement of this year’s Biden-Xi summit is, simply, the meeting itself
How to think through allegations of genocide in Gaza
Israel’s humanitarian pauses in Gaza, explained
The Israel-Hamas war is exposing Europe’s divisions
The House censure of Rashida Tlaib, explained
Filed under: 
What is Gaza?
Filed under: 
What are the “two-state solution” and the “one-state solution”?
Filed under: 
What are settlements, and why are they such a big deal?
Filed under: 
What is the West Bank?
Filed under: 
What are Israel and Palestine? Why are they fighting?
More than 500 Biden campaign alumni want a Gaza ceasefire
In the West Bank, Israeli settlers are on an anti-Palestinian rampage
The world’s largest child displacement crisis is in Sudan 
European Jews face a surge of antisemitism amid Israel-Hamas war
There’s a sliver of good US-China news — and it involves nukes
Iran could determine how far the Israel-Hamas war spreads
Israel hits civilian infrastructure as ceasefire calls grow
The Israel-Hamas war reveals how colleges lost their way on free speech

      
        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      VoxCare
    
Dylan Scott guides you through the fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic and the health care policies that matter most.
Check your inbox for a welcome email.
Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.
Pagination
